Do you fear death?
No I don't. Not at all.
I look forward to it.
I don't look forward to the act of dying.
But I look forward to
what's on the other side.
And I'll mention in this context
that my partner,
my partner of 25 years
is Christina Hardy.
She died last spring.
She was a psycho, not like myself.
She had had many deep experiences.
She had no fear of death.
And the two of us have no fear of death
because she had gone
to where she would be going
when she died.
She had personal familiarity with it,
and she knew
that it was a place of great blessing,
great beauty, great joy.
When you understand,
I mean, and I don't mean
just intellectually,
but understand
and have had deep communion
with these deeper levels of reality
that on the other side of
time, space, reality,
then approaching death
is not
the dirge of sadness or mourning,
or just grief and loss, but rather
it becomes a celebration of a life
well lived.
Christina had lived her life very well.
She had risen
to the challenges of her life
and her last years with me
were some of the best years
of our marriage.
As we as we move towards her death.
And I expect that to be true for me, too.
I don't have any fear of death.
And, in fact, I just have to be patient.
Because for me,
my belief is, my understanding
is that at the very least, when I die,
I'll be able to go back to
some of the deepest places
in the universe that I had access through
my psychedelic work,
because I know the address,
as Robert Monroe would say,
you can go anywhere
where you know the address,
and I know the address of these places,
and I can go back to there, and I know
I'll be able to go on
even deeper from there.
So, no, I have no fear of death at all.
Okay, Chris, welcome to the show.
Night between 1979 and 1999,
shortly after starting your career
as a university professor,
you decided to take LSD 73 times
in a carefully planned,
therapeutically structured sessions.
And just, you know,
I have to start the conversation
by asking, you know, why?
And and what motivated this?
This is a very
this is a very unique, experiment
to, to put yourself through.
So can you give me just share
share a bit about that. Yeah.
Well, I had just finished graduate school
at Brown University.
I was a philosopher.
Religion.
I was starting my teaching career,
and in the first year I met
Ian Stevenson's work on reincarnation.
That was a major pivot in my thinking.
But more importantly,
I met Stan Groves work.
I read
realms of the Human Unconscious,
which had just been published
a couple of years before,
and I immediately saw the
importance of standards work
not just for psychology
and clinical therapeutic work,
but also for my field
philosophy religion.
If what Stan was saying is true,
then this was a methodology
that would allow us
to actually push
the boundaries
of consciousness systematically and glean
philosophical insights into the structure
of at least consciousness, and probably
reality, that
the actual reality
that consciousness is perceiving.
So I knew this work
had to be done personally.
It couldn't be done
well from second hand accounts.
So I began this work, and I didn't
expect it to last 20 years when I did it.
But that's what happened.
I worked for four years,
I stopped for six years,
and then I worked for another
ten years very intensely.
And I chose to work
in with high doses of LSD.
Stan outlined in his early writings
two protocols that they had used.
One was low dose psycho
lytic therapy,
healing
those psyche away
gradually layer by layer.
Because of the time constraints
of a dual career marriage
and the difficulty
of being able to plan a weekend
for this entire session with children
soon to come,
I chose to work with high doses of LSD
in a psychedelic protocol,
and I worked at 500 to 600 micrograms.
And this is a regimen
that I don't recommend today.
I'd do it differently
if I were starting over again.
But basically, I thought that I could
consume my karmic baggage
if I just took bigger bites out of it.
Working at these high doses.
It turned out that I
was applying a model,
of psychology and a
model of the human psyche that was wrong.
And so because within two years,
I was being drawn into experiences
that were so deep and so broad, involving
so many thousands of human beings,
that I began to realize
that my entire model
of personal transformation, personal
enlightenment, was too narrow,
to do justice to the states
that actually unfold in these states.
So for me,
it was a professional
and personal journey
seeking to understand
the deep structure of reality.
And what was it that caused that shift
from the personal to the collective?
Well,
after about two years in the work,
I went through
what Stan would have described
as a classic ego death.
Experience, culminating
after two years of working
at what he would call
the perinatal level of consciousness,
deep death.
And I expected at that point
for things to get easier.
I expected to go more easily
into transpersonal spaces.
But what started immediately
was a new cycle that ended
up lasting another two years.
I have to back up one second.
My work
always involved a cleansing portion
of the session
and an ecstatic portion of the session.
So there was a purification
cleansing portion
which, if you'd navigated it
well, would usually come to a crescendo.
Some type of death and, and release.
And then
the rest of the session
was in an ecstatic state.
So in this second stage
of the work, after ego death,
I began to have experiences
of profound human suffering, covering
vast numbers of people
and a vast number of years.
And I was taken into it gradually
but systematically.
Every session was getting deeper
and wider
and deeper and wider,
with more and more suffering.
And eventually I had to realize that
this was
larger than anything
that could be related to me personally.
This wasn't
some former life, experiences.
It wasn't simply,
what I wasn't drawing into
my personal
therapy content
from the collective psyche
that reinforced my personal ego death,
because I really had gone
through a very decisive ego
death already, and that forced me.
And this is the main
theme of my book,
Dark Nataly Dawn was to recognize
that there is no strong boundary
between the individual
and the collective psyche,
and when you work
with highly energized states,
as I was in using high doses of LSD,
then if you work with high energy states,
those energy states naturally expand
to vast
landscapes of the collective psyche.
And literally the patient
in those sessions becomes
not just you personally.
The patient becomes some aspect
of the collective psyche
that something was using my sessions
to bring about some catharsis
in some small portion
of the collective psyche,
in order to drain the trauma
that still resides within the psyche
from human history.
All the wars that we've been through,
all the droughts, all the pain
and suffering,
all the violence to each other,
anything which is not resolved
by the time
the individuals who experience it die.
That pain can, quite congeals
in the collective psyche
and becomes a burden
to the collective psyche.
Healthy functioning.
So that's the
that's the the
theory that I presented in
Dark Net early Dawn.
And what role do you feel
healing individuals suffering may
or may play
in the bigger picture of the cosmos,
do you think?
Well, I think all of us essentially
are cells within the macro
intelligence, the macro
consciousness of our species.
And so any time one individual
comes to a healing,
goes through a healing process
and engages
some aspect of their personal shadow,
personal history,
I think that sets in motion,
a healing that radiates around the person
360 degrees.
So we are all fractal
embedded in this larger
collective mind, this collective psyche,
so that when we work intensely,
that healing
doesn't just stay
within our personal boundaries,
but it naturally radiates out and touches
the healing of the entire species
to some degree.
And so if you actually work
and you're experiencing
collective suffering
and collective healing,
that's just taking that one step farther.
But anytime one of us
addresses,
confronts, and heals personal trauma,
then that has a positive,
uplifting effect
on the collective psyche as a whole.
It makes a lot of sense.
And something else
I was curious to ask, you know, is like
you had to do this at a time
when psychedelics were were illegal
so very much in the dark.
What was it like to sort of
go between these two worlds
on a regular basis, where you are,
you know, engaging with the sublime
and then coming back to the mundane?
What's what's that like as a person?
Yeah.
Well, there are two aspects.
One of them is engaging,
as you say, the sublime.
And coming back to the mundane.
But the other aspect was,
being a university professor
teaching and doing the things
professors do,
but not being able
to talk about my work
to my colleagues or my, students.
Never my students.
Some of my colleagues knew what
I was doing, and we talked,
but not at great depth because,
you know, for people
who don't have deep experience
with psychedelics,
they simply can't understand.
They can't follow.
What happens
when you take
a deep journey into that work.
So it was a secrecy.
I mean, I knew I had to do this
in secret in order to do it,
because by 1978 79, this was illegal.
And I don't like breaking the law,
but I felt that it was more important
for me to use these substances,
which would one day,
I knew, become legal, to do them
in this underground fashion.
I found in the beginning it was fine,
but I found that
the longer I did this work,
the more burdensome this secrecy became.
And I found that if you can't,
if you create,
a persona which doesn't reflect
your full integrity,
it sets in motion pressures
within the psyche. It's like you.
It starts on the outside.
But then eventually that
that discrepancy
between who you really are
and who you are pretending to be
or who you're being socially,
it begins to produce cracks
within the human psyche.
And I found that years down the road,
it was becoming increasingly difficult
for me to maintain that boundary between
my private
non psychedelic life
and my personal psychedelic light.
And that's what I'd say.
It's became more difficult.
It means,
I'm a teacher.
Students would ask me questions,
which I could tell
was very important to them,
but I could only answer them
deeply, adequately if I were drawing upon
my psychedelic experience,
which was an art
which I was not allowed to do.
And as a teacher,
the desire to share knowledge
and to teach
that created a tension with me.
Because I had knowledge
I was not allowed to share.
The second part that you're talking about
is the challenge
of going into deep, transcendent states
and then coming back to your ordinary,
mundane condition
and then going back again
into deep, transcendent states
and coming back
into your ordinary condition.
I want to say that
I didn't have any difficulty
psychologically, personally,
going out and coming back.
I seem to have a psyche.
Not everybody does.
But my system seemed to be comfortable
losing its boundaries,
opening up into transcendental spaces,
and then coming back
and congealing into my mundane space.
And I would.
I made a serious effort to recall
and remember
everything that happened to me
in those states.
So I would write my sessions up
within 24 hours
and I'd hold them, capture them.
I tried to live by the teachings
that were given to me.
I tried to understand
and comprehend things
that were not comprehensible
to me in the first stages.
But if you go back over
and over and over again,
then they begin to make more sense.
You begin to be more comfortable at
these states.
But in the end, I mean, as I
went into
the late stages of the work
in the last five years of the work,
I did find it difficult
to come back into ordinary,
mundane reality,
because at that time I was being drawn
so deeply into the divine
body of crystalline consciousness,
into what I call diamond
consciousness,
so deeply into those realities that,
it just became very, very difficult
to come out of those states
and to come back into a state
where I could remember them,
and I could understand them,
but I couldn't access them again
under my own
power, within my own human resources.
That became a burden.
And it
I didn't realize how much of a burden
it would be.
It became until after I stopped my work.
It was after
I stopped my work that I realized
that I really was kind
of overextended, transcendental,
and I had to make a conscious choice
to stay grounded
in time and space in my personal reality
and integrate
what I had done, rather than continue
to go deep diving into the universe.
Wow, wow.
And.
Was the conclusion
that you took from that that.
There was a
there was a meaning to be found,
a purpose to be found for your life in
bringing the transcendent
to the everyday.
There was in several ways.
First, again, I'm not a therapist.
I'm not trained as a therapist.
And I made the decision long ago to
to not become a therapist either,
even in the back
in the underground sense,
but to function as a solo explorer,
to try to be willing to push my system
as far as I could,
to go out as deeply as I could,
and to try to understand
what I was being shown,
in those conditions.
So that satisfied a very deep
philosophical need to understand.
And as I have come to understand
my past lives,
I've done
several years of past life therapy.
I've uncovered a dozen
or so of my former lives,
and I began to understand
that some of the experiences
and some of the lack of understanding
of how reality functions
was transferred into this incarnation
and and seeding my deep desire
to understand how the world works.
Why is there so much suffering?
How can a benign
and supremely intelligent
source manifest
a universe that is so painful
and so difficult?
What's going on here?
Why is it this way?
Have we done something wrong?
Why is this difficult?
And now I think I have
an understanding of that.
And that
that was a primary drive to understand.
And then the second drive
is to share that understanding.
But I wasn't really
and I did share that
understanding indirectly
in the courses that I was teaching
at the university,
courses in world religions,
eastern religions, Buddhism,
comparative mysticism.
But I wasn't able to share them directly
as coming
from these psychedelic visions
until after I retired
and after I began to write
completely uninhibited Lee,
which I did in,
LSD in the mind of the universe.
And when I began to do that
and began to follow that into the world,
the split that I created in myself
between the professor part
and the psychedelic part
began to heal,
and they began to be merged,
until finally,
I can be my full
and complete self in all circumstance.
And what was that like?
Whenever you were able to sort of
let your mind off a leash
and just actually write
about these topics
that had been
swirling around up there
for, for decades?
Well,
it was healing first.
It was a little scary.
I mean, it literally after I retired,
it took me three years to get myself
in a psychological space
where I was willing
to share this information because I,
I knew
my colleagues
would not be able to understand it
or take it in.
I knew I was writing
for the next generation,
younger people who would be coming along.
But even so, to share your deepest,
most intimate spiritual experiences
with the world,
you know, that's like
sharing your sex life.
And it's very, very private.
And it took me a while
to be willing
to let people that deeply into my life,
because I'm a private person by nature.
And eventually I came to this position
of being willing to let people in.
I really, by understanding that
these experiences
were not given to me for myself,
they were given to me
to pass along to others, to support them
in their spiritual journey
and their explorations in life.
And so I, I surrendered
personal attachment to the story
and then began the process
of telling the story.
It took me
five years to write
LSD in the mind of the universe.
And the last chapter,
which is about coming
and coming down the mountain.
When I
what happened
after I stopped
my sessions
was the longest chapter to write.
It took me an entire year
just to write that one chapter,
because I really,
I really
had to process
everything that had happened to me
in the 20 years
after I'd stopped my sessions.
So once I did this, once
I went through this process,
once I had told the story,
it felt good.
It felt good to come out of the closet,
because being in a psychedelic closet
is just as damaging
as being in any other closet
where you have to deny something.
It's important to you.
For sure, for sure.
And
for in your,
a few things come to mind here.
But for me.
Any time in my life
when I've turned toward suffering
and engage
with suffering and seek to alleviate it,
the experience is always meaningful.
It always
touches something deep inside that
you.
I wouldn't say it feels good,
but it feels right
if it's whole, you know.
And I was wondering
you did mentioned there about,
you know, you've you've really
you got the answers
you were looking for
with regards to suffering.
Would you be able to just to comment
on that and expand on that a little and
share your thoughts, your.
Well, first, just an
observation on the process.
When you are confronted with suffering
in psychedelic space,
as in psychotherapeutic space,
it's challenging, it's difficult.
It's difficult
to let that much suffering in.
But as you say, it may not be fun,
may not be pleasant,
but it feels like the right thing to do.
And when you
embrace your personal shadow suffering,
there comes a point where eventually,
once you integrate it all and you,
you see what
the source is
and you confront it and you live with it,
there is a certain falling away.
You know, the pain falls away
and there is a freedom
which unfolds in its wake.
And I found that to be true also
for all the forms of suffering
that surfaced on this journey,
even when I was going through
that terrible collective suffering,
the hell the hell realms, you might say,
and I felt that there
was a meaning to this work,
even though it wasn't personal meaning
it was
personal in the sense that it felt like
this is something that I was meant to do.
And as I learned later down the road,
that was true, that that,
as I began to understand
and was shown my purpose
for this incarnation,
a very significant part of
it was this actual
process of facilitating
collective healing.
When I went into this pain
and allowed it to run through me
deeper and deeper.
Eventually, after two years,
it culminated in a
in a crescendo of of pain.
And then it sort of
spun me out into deep,
transpersonal places.
It's when it spun me out
beyond the entire
human psyche into archetypal reality.
And there were still episodes of
of suffering remaining, because
what I found is that
death and rebirth is a cycle,
you know, it just it goes round and round
and you don't die once when you simply
when you die at the egoic level,
that gives you access
to a certain level
of transpersonal consciousness.
But if you keep pushing,
then eventually you're
going to come to a threshold
and you'll have to go through
another round of dying,
another round of suffering
in order
to gain access
to the next level of consciousness.
And if you're systematically systematic
and you work at that level,
eventually the same thing will happen.
You'll go to yet
another round of death and rebirth,
and that'll take you into yet
another level of consciousness
where the rules of physics are different.
The rules are just different.
It's a different realm.
I found that,
I learned to trust that process,
to trust the process,
that welcoming anything that happens,
no matter
whether you understand it or not.
Embracing the suffering that happens
always work to my betterment
in work,
to the betterment of
beings that I'll never meet.
But it also worked to
my personal betterment
because it allowed me
to experience things
that were important to me
that became important to me.
That kind of ontological intimacy
with the creative principle of existence
was really important.
How is your inner experience of life
now different
after you've did this work
compared to before?
I know it's very difficult
to put your own
your own perceptions
into into words,
but is there anything you could share
there about
what life is like for you on the inside?
After having been through
such such incredible experiences?
Well,
I don't consider myself
an enlightened being.
So let's just get that out of the way.
I don't live in that kind of space.
I think
if I were seeking enlightenment
in this work,
I would have done it very differently.
I would have done much lower doses,
you know,
enlightenment, as I understand it,
as a condition of transparency
to the ground of reality,
which is always present,
never changing, always there
living in communion,
daily communion,
and minute by minute with this reality.
And while I certainly touched things
like that, my work really was different.
It wasn't therapeutic healing
and it wasn't aimed primarily
at spiritual awakening.
I began to understand that it was aimed
at cosmological exploration.
I was trying to seek and understand
larger and larger
pictures of how the universe works.
So the end result,
once you do that, is.
It leaves you with a certain porosity,
but not the same type of porosity
that is enlightenment.
Classically said,
it has left me,
calmer, more at peace.
I understand reality more than I did
before. More deeply.
I understand reincarnation more deeply.
I have an understanding of
the cosmic processes that are involved
in human evolution,
where evolution is taking humanity,
where reincarnation is taking humanity.
There is a certain step back and enjoying
the magnificent splendor
of the universe around us, and also
understanding with empathy,
with compassion,
the suffering that people go through,
so much and.
I have a certain understanding
of how that plays out
in a larger evolutionary horizon.
So there there is a, a contentment.
There's, certainly
a deepened compassion.
An understanding,
a relaxation,
and a desire to be of use
as to be just to be helpful,
just to be as much use to other people
as I can in the time that's left to me.
That sounds pretty good.
Do you fear death?
No, I don't.
Not at all. I look forward to it.
I don't look forward to the act of dying.
But I look forward to
what's on the other side.
And I'll mention in this context
that my partner, my partner of 25 years,
Christina Hardy, she died last spring.
She was a psychic, not like myself.
She had had many deep experiences.
She had no fear of death.
And the two of us have no fear of death
because she had gone
to where she would be going
when she died.
She had personal familiarity with it,
and she knew
that it was a place of great blessing,
great beauty, great joy.
And when you when you understand,
I mean, and I don't mean
just intellectually, but understand and,
had deep communion
with these deeper levels of reality
that on the other side of
time, space, reality,
then approaching death
is not the dirge of sadness or mourning
or just grief and loss,
but rather
it becomes a celebration of a life.
Well lived.
Christina had lived her life very well.
She had risen
to the challenges of her life,
and her last years with me
were some of the best years
of our marriage.
As we as we move towards her death.
And I expect that to be true for me too.
I don't have any fear of death
in, In fact, I just have to be patient.
Because for me, I my belief is
my understanding
is that at the very least, when I die,
I'll be able to go back to
some of the deepest places
in the universe that I had access through
my psychedelic work.
Because I know the address
as Robert Monroe would say,
you can go anywhere
where you know the address,
and I know the address of these places,
and I can go back to there, and I know
I'll be able to go on
even deeper from there.
So, no, I have no fear of death.
Adele. Wow. Okay.
Yeah.
I've heard you describe death
almost as a as a homecoming,
and that
that's a really interesting way
to where to put it.
Can you tell us about the work of
of Michael Newton?
And to what extent do you believe that
we before
coming here, we consciously choose
a particular life,
a particular that's a cohort, a family,
a people to come here with.
What are you saying?
What do you make of that idea?
Well,
I have found that
to be true, in my experience,
as I've come to know the deeper
cause and effect patterns of my life.
You know, my first book,
Life Cycles, was on reincarnation,
in which I tried to integrate
all the best available evidence
for reincarnation that was available.
At the time.
I did not know
Michael Newton's work at that time.
His came a little bit later.
I like Michael Newton's work a lot.
I respect his work a great deal.
It rings true to me.
It rings true
to my own
experience of the bardo
in psychedelic states.
It rings true to what I understand
from the mystical traditions
of the world, particularly Buddhism,
and their description
of what happens to an individual
when they die.
His is more detailed.
Another person that I would mention,
if you want to understand
the deep structure of the cycle
going into the spiritual reality,
coming back to time and space
into the circle is,
Robert Monroe.
He wrote three important journey,
books on the out-of-body state,
his experiences out-of-body,
and in his book Far Journeys
and the Ultimate Journey, two books,
Far Journeys and The Ultimate Journey,
he gives a comprehensive description
of what happens to us when we die.
And I find it very congruent with,
Michael Newton's description
now on the
choosing of our incarnation.
I'm an educator, so let me bring
an educator's, metaphor to it.
When children,
are starting their studies,
we don't give kindergartens
and earnest and first graders
much of a choice in what they study.
We say study this,
but as you go into high school,
you have more choices,
more freedom to choose
as you go into college
and graduate school,
you have a lot more freedom
to choose what you're going to study.
And I think it's something like that
for the soul, too.
It may be the case
that in the early stages, you basically
things are arranged for you and you go,
where you're told by
people who understand more than you do.
But as you grow
and as you learn,
I think you have more freedom and more,
freedom to choose
so that by the time you have
enough cycles of reincarnation
under your belt.
And I think most of us do by now,
I agree with Michael Newton that we,
we choose
the life we are incarnating into,
the people we are incarnating with.
It's a group choice.
The themes of the life.
Now, Michael Newton says there is,
a place that you
go when you
are consulting
with your spiritual guides,
where you are given
an experiential taste of the lives
that they are recommending to you,
that you could choose.
You can't see the end of it
because it's not. The end is not written.
You can get a sense of the beginning
and you choose
whether you want any of these lives.
You don't have to take these lives.
You could go completely,
on your own
recog or cognizance
and try to go it on your own.
But most people are wise to take
a choice from among the choices
that are given to them.
So my position is that, pretty much today
there are no,
that everybody is a is a volunteer.
Everybody knows
what they were getting into there.
And we understand
a much deeper understanding of history
and an able ability
to see more into the future
when you were in spiritual reality
than when you were in physical reality.
So my assumption
is that we all knew
what we were getting into.
We all knew about this
particular period of history
and the intensity and,
and the opportunities
in this period of history,
we chose together who we would be with,
in our former
life companions and,
and then we jump in
and, then we do our best,
and then we die and we return home,
and then we begin.
Then we remember the larger context
of our choosing
in the larger context of our life,
and we see how we did
which things we handled well,
which things we handled not well.
We follow this learning forward.
And then after a period of study
and and recreation and restoration,
eventually the time comes
where we make another choice
to incarnate again.
A few things come to mind.
You know,
if that's the paradigm that we hold,
it seems that we can be
a lot more patient with ourselves
in this lifetime.
And and that doesn't mean complacent,
but just realize, you know,
you're here
to learn
a specific set
of lessons or experience
a certain set of things,
and to maybe let that process
unfold, maybe more,
more organically and more naturally.
Yeah. I think so.
A patient with ourselves
and also compassionate
with everyone else that we see because
and this was one of the great
liberating things
when I first shifted to thinking
in terms of reincarnation,
because in Western religions,
there's so much of a pressure,
like everyone,
you got to cross the finish line
before you die.
Otherwise you go to hell
or something doesn't work well for you.
But once you understand reincarnation,
you realize
not everybody's in the same class,
not everybody's
trying to learn the same things.
People are at different stages
of a long evolutionary journey, and,
it just gives you more patience
and compassion for people
who are at very,
very different stages
of their journey than you are.
Some of them are more advanced
and working on more advanced themes.
Some of them are less advanced.
So it sort of suspends judgment.
It just it's
judgment is not wise.
It just traps you in your preconceptions,
patience and compassion.
Yeah, yeah.
Something I heard you say,
which I really liked,
is that older,
older learners help younger learners.
And just because someone has a child
doesn't mean they were a child.
So, so to speak and so on.
Some an older person might have a,
a child. So.
So yeah, it.
Yeah, it's an interesting way
to look at humanity, you know. Yeah.
I don't when I look at people,
I don't see people so much anymore.
I try to tune into souls.
And souls are not necessarily
the same age as the body
that's holding them.
Just as you say, there can be old souls
and young bodies,
young souls and old bodies.
And this is what Michael Newton says in
terms of the structure
of postmortem existence.
Older learners help younger learners.
The whole system is set up so that older
learners can help younger learners
throughout the process.
I really like that.
Need to a person you mentioned
earlier as well
is the work of Ian Stevenson.
Is there anything you feel
would be particularly important
to highlight about the research
that he's done?
Anything that,
you know, might surprise people.
What would
what he's discovered in his work?
Well, I think of Ian Stevenson
as the Charles Darwin of reincarnation.
He has provided.
I mean, reincarnation is an old idea
that goes back several thousand years,
but he has provided
empirical evidence that documents the
the continuity of memory, continuity
of consciousness across lifetimes.
His last great work, on reincarnation
in biology,
he not only documents
continuity of memory,
but he also documents continuity of
death, trauma
manifesting in the bodies
of the next incarnation.
So that's somebody who is shot
well, and his medical records
are someone who has been hung
some times in their next incarnation.
They have birthmarks are
are seeming scars on their tissue
that relate to the trauma
of the previous incarnation.
So I just think Stevenson's work,
and many volumes of his work
and this work has continued
by Jim Tucker at University of Virginia,
really provides ample empirical
justification, empirical evidence,
to justify the conclusion
that reincarnation
is not a matter of faith,
it's not a matter of it's just
it's just a matter of empirical fact.
It's something that nature
has learned how to do just.
And it's a matter
of collecting intelligence
and rolling intelligence forward,
just as evolution rolls intelligence
forward for whole species at some point,
nature has found a way
to roll learning forward,
in individuals within certain species.
So I think of reincarnation
as a higher octave of evolution.
It's the same impulse,
the same developmental capacity,
but now focused on consciousness
and focused, on individuals.
Just to underline how
shocking it is,
what we're talking about here is,
am I right in saying that
he would have interviewed, say, children
that would claim
to have memories of a past life,
and then one of these kids might have
had, say,
had a birthmark
in a specific spot in their body.
And then he would
then trace details of that past life
and find that
the person might have been shot there,
or if it was on the neck,
might have been hung there.
Is that what we're saying?
Yes, that's absolutely correct.
The work.
His work focuses on studying
young children from around the world
who have spontaneous memories
of their previous life.
Now, there's some idiosyncratic
characteristics of these children
too long to go into the
whole story,
but basically they tend
to reincarnate faster
and closer to the life
place of the first personality
than the population at large.
There are certain larger studies
looking at the population at large,
but these children, who have verified
memories of their previous
life, tend to reincarnate
within two
and a half years
of the death of the previous personality
and within 50 miles of the life
place of the previous personality.
So they're coming in faster
and closer to their previous personality.
Most people it's longer
between lives
and it's more distant between lives.
So they're sort of an unusual subset.
But they're cumulatively very,
very strong evidence.
It's just very hard
to explain how these children
can know what they know
by any kind of
ordinary, conventional
transmission of information
or even super science.
Just.
The most logical and simplest
and powerful explanation is rebirth.
Wow. Okay.
Can you tell us about this sort of
up and out sort of philosophy
that many,
many religions
and wisdom traditions hold versus
I've heard you speak
about the importance of it.
Maybe it's more about
bringing your life to fruition.
You just tell us about this contrast.
Well, I think in general,
and this is a broad generalizations,
and there are some exceptions
for especially
spiritual, teachers
within these traditions.
But basically
the religions of the Axial Age,
basically over the last 5000 years
have tended to be
doubt what I would call an up
and out cosmology.
That is, the goal is to achieve salvation
or to achieve enlightenment.
And when and then
when you die,
to leave the entire space time system.
So that in Hinduism
reincarnation is called moksha,
which means escape, escape,
not only from your personality,
but escape
from samsara, the cycle of rebirth.
And this tendency tends to run
throughout the popular
versions of the religions that the goal
is not to just stay on earth,
but the goal is to go back
to our spiritual home,
to get there, and to stay there.
So your work results in a transformation
of your person.
And the reward is some off planet
Paradise.
Whether it's pure land
or the garden in Islam or heaven
for Christians and so on, so forth.
And I think this leaves
a fundamental question unanswered.
And the question is,
what is the purpose of space
time in the beginning?
Why is space time here?
Is it
something that we're simply supposed to
escape from?
Is it a trial and tribulation?
It is something that we've inherited
because of cosmic fall, the original sin.
And I think
that might
have made sense in the early centuries
when we were still thinking
the universe
was relatively young,
6000, 10,000 years old.
But now that we understand how,
first of all,
the universe is on this iteration, 13 .7.
8 million years,
and we don't know
how many other explosions
and implosions have been
and how vast the universe is.
And when we begin to really comprehend
the enormity of the scale of creation,
then it makes this idea that the goal
is to finally reach some clarity
about your death, your self sense
to understand,
to reach that part of your consciousness
which is common ground
with all living beings,
so that what you are
and what they are is the same essence
as the Hindus would say.
Atman equals Brahman.
As soon as you reach that,
as soon as you mature enough
for all the years of evolution
and 5000 years
of writing and meditation,
as soon as you reach that, then your goal
is to get off the entire
assembly line of time and space.
And I think that's that.
To realize our transcendental nature,
to realize these deep
and profound truths,
only takes us halfway
in the creative intent.
It's not simply to achieve
escape velocity
and to go into the spiritual bliss,
but it's also to bring
that spiritual bliss
and to bring the power
of divine creativity,
which is your birthright,
your nature at core,
to fully actualize that inside
time and space.
Now, there are strains
within the religions,
which recognize that and hold that.
But I think for the populace at large,
that's not a common way of seeing it.
But I think,
I think we are going through
a transition
where we're beginning to understand
that the goal is to
achieve enlightenment.
And give some type of spiritual clarity,
some spiritual communion,
depth of spiritual communion.
And then
take that into our life inside
time and space and literally
bring heaven to earth,
to bring the conditions
of the radical joy
and freedom of heaven
into our earthly lives,
and to continue, then
to refine the human experience
here on this planet and elsewhere.
Wow, wow.
I'm going to read a rewrite.
Something I've heard you say elsewhere
that that really grabbed me.
Everybody experiences
the soul when they die,
but I think we're in the process
of giving birth to humanity.
Who's experiencing the soul fully
when they're alive on Earth.
And
to
what?
What heaven's evidence
do you think we have?
That there's something unique
about the time that we're living
in, where
in this particular century,
this new consciousness might be
be being burst into,
into the world?
Well,
I'm not going to answer that question.
As an academic
who has digested a lot of,
you know, sources of information,
one could
I mean, anthropologists can consult,
indigenous cultures
who have a certain vision of history
that this is a particular time
we could look at Hindu sources,
which talks about the collie, La
Luca Kali Yuga,
which is a time of intense
purification, which is immediately
before a time of cultural breakthrough.
And spiritual breakthrough.
I'd rather answer this just on the basis
of my own psychedelic experience,
because I'm more confident
drawing on that.
And in my work,
I went through a series of experiences
that, changed my understanding of what
the purpose of reincarnation is
and where reincarnation is taking us.
As I said, I have knowledge of
about a dozen of my former lives.
I did that during the six years
when I was also
not doing the psychedelic work.
I did some past life therapy work,
so I had some familiarity
with my deep past.
But in a particular session
about halfway through my journey,
I had a very deep experience.
When I began to,
my former lives began to come into me.
It was like ripe wrapping,
string around a kite spool.
And these lives were just coming into me
very fast.
And then they seemed to
hit critical mass and they fuzed.
And when they fuzed into one,
I experienced an explosion
of diamond light
out of coming out of my chest.
And I was catapulted
into a radical state
of consciousness beyond
anything I had known before,
in which I was an individual.
I wasn't Chris base,
but I was an individual.
But I was an individual
beyond any parameters
I had ever known before.
And I think
what I
experienced is what I call
the diamond soul, and that is the soul,
which is the complete
integration, healthy, well integrated,
balanced integration
of all of one's former lives
so that so deeply that they fuze
into a single entity.
And this is what I mean
of as the soul or the diamond soul.
Now, I think if things go well,
when we die, we return to our soul.
So we and then when we incarnate
a part of that energy incarnates
us, the individual incarnation.
And when we die,
we return to our soul and come back.
We turn to the soul and come back.
And so I think we do experience the soul
more commonly
after our deaths and
before our incarnation.
But if we
think of this pulsing taking place
over and over and over again,
over thousands
and hundreds of thousands of years,
I think it begins to sort of
make more sense that sooner or later
in the evolutionary journey,
the process of evolution itself
is to foster
a maturation or development
so that we grow into an as our soul
on our on earth, in our incarnations,
that we literally
live in a state of consciousness
where we're no longer tempted to identify
as just this body.
We know that the consciousness
that this body carries is older than this
physical body,
and will continue longer than this
physical body.
And I think basically my
and as it was laid out for me
in my sessions as the story of humanity's
spiritual development was unfolded
in my sessions,
I think we're coming into a
time where the challenge
is literally to grow up.
The challenge is to grow up
psychologically, spiritually,
and to claim
the deeper being that we are.
And Chris Basch
is only one incarnation
of the soul, of my soul.
And the goal is to wake up to the soul,
not only to establish communion with it
and to receive guidance from it,
but literally,
eventually to incarnate soul
in your physical incarnation.
I think this is
where our entire species is going.
I think we're coming to a crescendo
in our spiritual journey
and in this crescendo
there is a tremendous up
growth coming underneath us
that's taking humanity
into a fundamental change
of our psychological condition.
This is a change
which is affecting
the substructure of the psyche,
the collective psyche.
It's not just an individual
personal thing, it's a collective thing.
It's an evolutionary pivot
that we're making.
I think we are waking up spiritually
and becoming
what I would call diamond souls on earth.
Now, a lot of people have this intuition.
They've seen it, they've experienced it.
They used different names to
they have different words for it.
They talk about,
homo spiritualists
or noetic Homme on the Vatican's,
different nomenclature.
But I think all of us
are seeing the same thing, a shift
in our baseline consciousness
from one level
into a higher level,
a permanent shift in consciousness,
so that all human beings born
after this shift takes place
will be born
and operating
within a different collective psyche
than our ancestors have been.
And I don't think this is a shift
which is going to be quick,
going to happen,
you know,
suddenly, dramatically,
I think it's going to take
multiple generations
for us to make this transition.
And it will be preceded
by great purification,
just like when an individual mystic,
before they achieve mystical realization,
they go through
what some have called
the dark night of the soul,
which is a time of profound
cleansing, purification, confronting
one's personal shadow,
healing it, so on and so forth.
I think we are going through now.
We are beginning the dark night
of our collective soul
in which we are confronting
the sins of our fathers and mothers are
we are our fathers and mothers.
We're confronting the deep historical
inadequacies, unhelpful tendencies,
harmful tendencies,
the things we've done in the past.
Those are coming up very,
very strongly in the collective psyche.
We have to see this through
to its full conclusion
so that we can cooperate
with the very powerful spiritual energies
that are increasing underneath us
at this time in history.
It seems like we've been running
on momentum from the past,
hundreds and hundreds
and hundreds of years
of generations, iterations
and this habit energy.
And we're finally at a time
now as
as individuals where we
have the capacity to,
to be,
to be aware of that conditioning,
to be aware of of those patterns.
And in some cases, back then, you know,
what a
what a tremendous responsibility
to place on somebody.
But yeah, an interesting
time to be alive.
There's something else
I wanted to ask you
earlier, and I forgot,
but what have you just,
I completely agree with you.
It's a very exciting time to be alive.
Very powerful.
Time to be alive.
Yeah. Okay.
The not an easy question
or a late question to end on, but
wondering about
the problem of evil.
And specifically,
let's say someone like
a Hitler or a Stalin.
In the afterlife, after,
you know, a life like that ends,
what do you think might
happen to someone like that?
Yeah,
I want to be careful
because,
I don't want to indulgence
a speculative answer.
And inevitably,
this involves
a certain measure of speculation.
We can.
You're talking about kind of
human individuals
who are so distorted in their heart
and in their mind
that we would call them bad or evil.
And then there's a second
layer to question.
Is there cosmic principle of evil?
Now, I don't personally
I don't believe there's
a cosmic principle of evil,
but there is a cosmic
principle of inertia.
And there is if there is in us
something which
draws us to higher potentials
and deeper realization.
There is also a force in nature
which kind of pulls us down
into the lower side of our potential.
I don't think of that as evil
sunlight.
And okay, if you want to call it evil,
I would just call it
the regressive side of the tension
of our developmental capacity.
What happens to individuals who have done
so much damage to other individuals who,
in exalting themselves health
have hurt the lives of thousands
and millions of people?
Well, here I would turn to Michael Newton
and Michael Newton in his book
Destiny of souls.
His first book was journey of the soul
or Journey of Souls second
book, Destiny of souls.
He describes in more detail
what happens to individuals
who have been,
who have given themselves over to malice
injury, those type of things.
And he says they require special handling
because they're they are so distant.
They have pulled away
so far from their divine center,
because when we are
near the divine Center,
it's a place of deep
and profound compassion.
It's the divine center
is the touchstone of oneness.
With oneness comes compassion
comes at all inclusiveness.
So someone who is
pathological or malevolent in history
is very far away from their divine center
and therefore requires special handling
when they die
in order to handle the damage
which they've done to themselves
and to the people around them.
Now, one simple way of understanding
what happens to us when we die,
and I draw this
from looking at near-death
episode literature.
When people experience
a life review,
when people have the experience
of their life review,
they not only experience every second,
every intention,
every thought of their entire life,
but they experience how those actions
and how those thoughts impacted
those around them.
So someone who was in
a fistfight experiences
how the other person
experienced being beaten up
and what it did to their psyche,
and where
what happened
when they brought that anger home.
People who are in war,
who have assassinated people, experience
in their life.
Review what that assassination did
to the history of the family
that was without a father.
From that point on.
So one way of thinking about this
is if you just take a big rock
and throw it into a lake
and the ripples spread out,
our life is like that.
We send ripples out into the world.
What happens when
we die
is that all those ripples
come back to us,
and we experience
the full social impact of our lives.
Not to punish us, not even to reward us,
but because fundamentally, at core,
life is one.
And if you have lived your life
according to that value
and have tried to be good and careful
and kind
and compassionate to people,
you send out this wave of goodness.
It comes back to you and you experience
the bliss,
what we would call heaven or the bliss of
of one's spiritual well-being.
If you've done evil and harm and injury,
then that comes back to you as well.
And can you imagine what it would be
like to be Hitler and experience
the pain that you saw, that you caused
coming back to you?
And that's
why beings like this
require special handling
as they go through this
adjustment process.
He even goes so far
to say that some beings,
cannot be restored
to an operational,
a healthy balance in their psyche.
And those beings are sometimes recycled
in a more radical way to,
to an earlier stage
of their soul, spiritual evolution
and begin again.
So
it's a complicated topic,
but you get the basic idea.
Wow, that's a really, really well
articulated,
point of view
to a very difficult question.
So thank you for that.
Chris, it's been such a pleasure
speaking with you.
Really, really enjoyed this.
For anybody that wants to dive deeper
into your work after this,
where would you send them?
To learn more?
Well, they could go to the website,
my website.
Chris Spacecom.
It's kind of old and not up to date, but,
there's some information there.
You'll see my books there.
I've done so
maybe 85 or so 90 podcast and talks
that are online.
So it's not hard to find me
if you just Google me on YouTube,
you'll find places where I've given
these types of discussions
and talks as a talk on
the scientific evidence for reincarnation
that I gave in Germany
a few years back there.
They're different talks, but,
the most important thing,
I think would be to jump into
my books have been for books,
life cycles on reincarnation,
Dark Night,
early Dawn,
which is
when I first started
writing on psychedelic, experiences.
Then there's a book called
The Living Classroom, which describes
how my secret work,
which my students never knew about
how it began to impact them.
So it's about the distributed effect
of one spiritual practices.
And then lastly,
and maybe most importantly,
LSD in the mind of the universe.
Fantastic. Okay.
Thank you so much, Chris,
and I wish you the best going forward.
You know, very
I enjoyed our conversation very much.
Thank you very much. It's been an honor.
If you enjoyed this
episode,
you might also enjoy
getting our seven insights newsletter.
This is a once per month
email where I share
seven of the most valuable insights
I haven't covered in the previous
30 days.
It includes
book, podcast
and documentary recommendations,
as well as questions and quotes
specifically created
to help you
live a more creative,
intentional, and meaningful life.
It currently goes out
to over 50,000 subscribers each month,
and if you're interested in joining them,
you can sign up via the
link in the description.